the ultimate origins of batman
do not define what batman should
and must be batman
originated as a rip-off
of the shadow the shadow
was a success primarily in the form of
short illustrated novels not comic books
and radio broadcast drama
the shadow was not created
as children's entertainment the shadow
was created as
pulp fiction really a genre of fiction
that doesn't exist in the year 2020.
both batman and the joker as
characters originated directly
as rip-offs of specific stories
of the shadow published prior to the
first appearance
of batman in dc comics however
this does not define what batman is
nor what he now should be
in the first say two three years
of the batman comic book what happened
the creative team behind batman which
yes included
bill finger but bill finger didn't do
anything they at first were just
responding to the challenge
of trying to rip off the success of
superman and the success
of the shadow simultaneously and they
came up with batman
who was really in no sense whatsoever a
hero
and batman went around with a gun
sometimes a gatling gun
and mowed down his opponents if you
don't know
the shadow massacres people the shadow
will just
show up in a warehouse and murder
everyone there with a gun
and the shadow in part descends from
and represents a kind of
pulp detective novel that even the name
of the company
detective comics reflects or represents
a genre of fiction
more associated with the 1930s and 1940s
that doesn't exist anymore
and that wasn't created as children's
entertainment that didn't have
a moral to the story the creative team
behind batman didn't just face
censorship the normal story that's told
about batman
is that these evil forces
compelled the creative team to censor
batman
more and more until we got the 1950s
image of batman and robin
as best friends and good old chums
being friends with commissioner border
pardon me
being friends with commissioner gordon
walking around in broad daylight
working with the police deputized by the
police the family-friendly watered-down
batman and this is considered the
antithesis
of the raw original vision of batman
which as mentioned has this much more
adult
deadly edge partly derived from the
shadow and let's not forget
originally batman was a detective
inquiring into
supernatural villains
the tension the creative team had to
deal with
was between this blatantly dark violent
murderous material and
the fact that comic books were and still
are primarily children's entertainment
in what sense was batman
a hero rather than a villain
and what they came up with by the way
this was not
billfinger what they came up with
was the idea that batman was an
orphan that batman witnessed
his own parents being killed and he
witnessed them being killed
by a gun then out of this gnarled once
in little steps and stages over time out
of this emerged the idea
that batman had taken a vow that he
would never
kill anyone with a gun that he would
never use a gun at all
that's not in the original batman that's
not in the first few issues of the first
three
few years that he would take a vow that
he was gonna
fight crime with his wits with his fists
working in and out of the shadows there
was this idea
of batman as an incorruptible
super cop as someone who would arrest
the villains
literally tie them up and leave them in
front of
the police headquarters leave them with
an envelope full of evidence or
photographs proving who did what
that he was going above and beyond the
limit of what the police would do
but only to accomplish the same kind of
non-violent idealized outcome that the
police would or should
try to accomplish now only now
batman becomes a hero it's batman's
decision
to renounce violence to refuse the way
of the gun
it's batman's decision to differentiate
himself
from the thug in the street who shot his
parents dead
that's what makes him a hero and this
moral
uh fable is repeated
for robin his sidekick robin also
witnesses his parents being killed
basically by corrupt mob figures
pulling out an extortion extortion
scheme
within the circus
in the year 2020
small teams of creative people work
within
huge corporations i know it's easy to
imagine that like
a staff of hundreds of people are
responsible
for a batman movie or a star wars movie
it boils down to just a couple of people
in the writer's room especially in the
first stages
of developing a script or a pitch for a
script which may be a very simple idea
of what that movie ought to be two
things
one those creative teams those
few dozen people who have worked on
batman for the last 20 years
they have utterly lost sight of
what it was that made batman a hero
in the first place and to be clear
that's not the
ultimate origin of batman when he was
just
a rip-off of the shadow wearing
skin-tight clothing
and a cape with a symbol on his chest
because the creative team knew
skin-tight clothing and a cape with a
symbol in your chest is what had made
superman a smash hit commercial success
that's the ultimate origin but there's
this intermediate transition
where batman's redeveloped with some
kind of ethical purpose
that is in some sense heroic and is in
some sense
meaningful as children's entertainment
the creative teams who have worked on
batman in the last 20 years
have sneered at the notion that what
they're doing or what they ought to be
doing
is developing a form of heroic fiction
that actually works as children's
entertainment
writing for an audience of children
is simple but it's not easy
i remember reading a review of a disney
film
that was an adaptation of the mythology
of hercules
and the reviewer pointed out this film
is full of jokes
that maybe the parents or maybe the
grandparents
could get but none of them are funny
for children and the writing team behind
this movie disney circulates it seems
like they never
really committed to the idea that this
wasn't a satire
making fun of hercules but that children
would actually come to see this movie
trying to look up to hercules as a hero
that this really was on that deeper
level
children's entertainment
point two it's really easy
to take the creative process
itself for granted especially when
you as a creative person never chose it
the way comic books were written in the
1970s
nobody designed that process nobody
chose it i'm saying the 1970s quite
intentionally here
rather than talking about the 30s 40s
50s 60s
in the period of the 1970s developing
out of
assumptions in world war ii in the
post-war period
the creative process at comic book
headquarters whether for
marvel or dc reflecting quite a number
of push and pull factors in society
including the fact that
it was possible for comic book writers
to afford
rent in at least some of the boroughs of
the greater new york city area
and to come in physically to an office
and visit
and speak with their editor face to face
it was possible for teams of artists
to work together in the same room
if you asked those artists in the 1970s
if you asked those writers
would you rather work at home
alone and send in your
art through a magical computer device
that today doesn't exist that didn't
exist
in the 1970s wouldn't you prefer to not
have this editor staring over your
shoulder
to not have to justify the creative
decision wouldn't you prefer to have
that privacy and that just
that ease of being able to wake up in
your pajamas rather than put on a suit
and tie
and go to marvel headquarters put on a
suit and tie and go to dc comics
headquarters and deal with this
authoritarian
establishment i'm sure every artist
working in the 1970s would have said
yes yes yes that's much better tell me
about this marvelous computer technology
you're talking about let's transform the
whole industry so we can all just
stay at home in our pajamas and draw and
ink and illustrate
comic books each of us in isolation
in hip-hop music when rappers stopped
sleeping in the same house
to record their lyrics in the same booth
something changed there's something
there you can never
retrieve that's been lost forever
there's a wu-tang track
called winter wars and famously one of
the breakout vocalists
was passed out sleeping on the carpet
in the living room when the other
artists were working on this track and
trying to record it and they woke him up
off the carpet and said look man we're
getting nowhere with this song can you
come in and record some lyrics
and as as the legend goes he brushed
himself off and he went in and he gave
this amazing
performance on the mic and then everyone
else got excited
and they tried to compete with them and
make lyrics in response to it
just being in the same room
that part of the creative process you
might not
value it you might even resent it
you might think why do i have to put on
this suit and tie and go over why do i
have to sleep on the carpet
why do i have to hang out in this guy's
house to have access to this recording
studio's basement
today hip-hop artists record their
lyrics
they send it as an email attachment to
one another as an mp3
and someone sits at a computer and
stitches it together
into a hip-hop album and it's not the
same
and it's never going to be the same all
right
it's really easy to look back at the
creative crucible
of the 1970s editorial office the 1970s
story meeting having a picture story and
justify your story and talk
uh back and forth to a guy like julia
schwartz
right not not the most creative and open
minded guy you explained to julia
schwartz
what your idea is for the new green
lantern story
and he tells you why he thinks it's a
terrible idea and you go back and forth
and you sit in that room with other
artists and there's somebody telling you
that you know the proportions aren't
quite right and what you're drawing you
have to go back and do it again
there's an authoritarian structure there
there's a collegial structure that there
are
many elements to that that have
disappeared
partly just because the rent in new york
city went up and up and rather than
relocating
the business to the middle of the desert
or southern florida or something right
what happened is that the comic book
industry relocated from
somewhere to nowhere it's now just
isolated people
sitting at different desktops different
computers with different keyboards
all right so a fundamental
idea a fundamental question like
what is it that makes batman a hero
rather than a villain are we writing
for an audience of children or for an
audience of cynical
adults is this movie about batman
or is it a satire of what batman
used to be in the same sense that the
walt disney company
sleepwalks through making a satire of an
ancient greek myth
rather than really trying to sincerely
present that mythology trying to present
hercules as someone you'd respect
or even worship children are still
looking
for somebody to admire somebody to
emulate
they're still looking for symbols of
virtue
they're still looking for films to show
them the meaning of life and talk about
really simple fundamental things like
why it is the police don't just shoot
and kill the bad guy
why it is people are innocent until
proven guilty
why it is that you shouldn't take your
law
why it is that you shouldn't take the
into your own hands from the perspective
of a child
struggling with childlike notions of
justice and injustice and why isn't it
that people with
guns and fists can't just solve
everything that's wrong and bad in the
world
those things still matter they're still
meaningful
and there are millions of dollars to be
made
in trying to sincerely express
those meanings through the medium of
film
who wants the work